# An Informal Introduction to Python

## Input and Output in Python

Input and output are distinguished by the presence or absence of prompts (`>>>` and `…`):

- Type everything after the prompt when the prompt appears; lines that do not begin with a prompt are output from the interpreter.
- A secondary prompt on a line by itself in an example means you must type a blank line; this is used to end a multi-line command.

You can toggle the display of prompts and output by clicking on `>>>` in the upper-right corner of an example box. If you hide the prompts and output for an example, then you can easily copy and paste the input lines into your interpreter.

### Comments in Python

Many of the examples in this manual, even those entered at the interactive prompt, include comments. Comments in Python start with the hash character, `#`, and extend to the end of the physical line.

- A comment may appear at the start of a line or following whitespace or code, but not within a string literal.
- A hash character within a string literal is just a hash character.
- Since comments are to clarify code and are not interpreted by Python, they may be omitted when typing in examples.

**Example:**

```python
# This is the first comment
spam = 1  # and this is the second comment
          # ... and now a third!
text = "# This is not a comment because it's inside quotes."
```

## 3.1.1 Numbers
Using Python as a calculator is quick and efficient. The Python prompt (>>>) allows for simple arithmetic operations like addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. For instance, typing 5 + 3 returns 8. Additionally, Python supports more advanced operations, such as exponentiation (2 ** 3) and modulus (10 % 3).

The interpreter acts as a simple calculator: you can type an expression at it and it will write the value. Expression syntax is straightforward: the operators `+`, `-`, `*`, and `/` can be used to perform arithmetic; parentheses `()` can be used for grouping. For example:

```python
>>> 2 + 2
4

>>> 50 - 5*6
20

>>> (50 - 5*6) / 4
5.0

>>> 8 / 5  # division always returns a floating point number
1.6
```

The integer numbers (e.g. 2, 4, 20) have type int, the ones with a fractional part (e.g. 5.0, 1.6) have type float.

```python
>>> 17 / 3  # classic division returns a float
5.666666666666667

>>> 17 // 3  # floor division discards the fractional part
5

>>> 17 % 3  # the % operator returns the remainder of the division
2

>>> 5 * 3 + 2  # floored quotient * divisor + remainder
17
```

With Python, it is possible to use the ** operator to calculate powers

```python
>>> 5 ** 2  # 5 squared
25

>>> 2 ** 7  # 2 to the power of 7
128
```


The equal sign (=) is used to give a value to a variable. After that, no result is shown until the next interactive prompt:

```python
>>> width = 20
>>> height = 5 * 9
>>> width * height
900
```

Using an undefined variable will result in an error.

```python
n  # try to access an undefined variable
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
NameError: name 'n' is not defined
```


Floating-point numbers are fully supported, and operators with mixed-type operands automatically convert integer operands to floating point.

```python
4 * 3.75 - 1
14.0
```

In interactive mode, the last printed expression gets assigned to the variable _. This implies that when Python is utilized as a desk calculator, continuing calculations becomes somewhat easier.

```python
>>> tax = 12.5 / 100
>>> price = 100.50
>>> price * tax
12.5625
>>> price + _
113.0625
>>> round(_, 2)
113.06
```

The variable in question is intended to be treated as read-only by users. Users should avoid explicitly assigning a value to it, as doing so would generate an independent local variable with the same name, thereby obscuring the built-in variable with its magical functionality.

Furthermore, Python extends support beyond just integers and floating-point numbers, encompassing other numeric types like Decimal and Fraction. Additionally, Python natively handles complex numbers, denoted with the suffix j or J to signify the imaginary component (e.g., 3+5j).

## 3.1.2 Text

In Python, text manipulation is feasible, encompassing strings (denoted by type str). This entails handling characters like "!", words such as "rabbit", names like "Paris", sentences such as "Got your back.", etc. Strings can be enclosed within either single quotes ('...') or double quotes ("...") with identical outcomes [2].

```python
>>> 'spam eggs'  # single quotes
'spam eggs'
>>> "Paris rabbit got your back :)! Yay!"  # double quotes
'Paris rabbit got your back :)! Yay!'
>>> '1975'  # digits and numerals enclosed in quotes are also strings
'1975'
```

To incorporate a quote within another quote, we must "escape" it by preceding it with . Another option is to utilize a different set of quotation marks:

```python
>>> 'doesn\'t'  # use \' to escape the single quote...
"doesn't"
>>> "doesn't"  # ...or use double quotes instead
"doesn't"
>>> '"Yes," they said.'
'"Yes," they said.'
>>> "\"Yes,\" they said."
'"Yes," they said.'
>>> '"Isn\'t," they said.'
'"Isn\'t," they said.'
```

In the Python shell, string definitions and their output may appear differently. The print() function enhances readability by excluding enclosing quotes and displaying escaped and special characters.

```python
>>> s = 'First line.\nSecond line.'  # \n means newline
>>> s  # without print(), special characters are included in the string
'First line.\nSecond line.'
>>> print(s)  # with print(), special characters are interpreted, so \n produces new line
First line.
Second line.
```

To prevent characters prefaced by \ from being interpreted as special characters, raw strings can be utilized by adding an r before the first quote.

```python
>>> print('C:\some\name')  # here \n means newline!
C:\some
ame
>>> print(r'C:\some\name')  # note the r before the quote
C:\some\name
```

There is one subtle aspect to raw strings: a raw string may not end in an odd number of \ characters.

String literals can span multiple lines. One way is using triple-quotes: """...""" or '''...'''. End of lines are automatically included in the string, but it’s possible to prevent this by adding a \ at the end of the line.

```
print("""\
Usage: thingy [OPTIONS]
     -h                        Display this usage message
     -H hostname               Hostname to connect to
""")
```

Strings can be concatenated with the + operator, and repeated with *:
```
>>> # 3 times 'un', followed by 'ium'
>>> 3 * 'un' + 'ium'
'unununium'
```

Adjacent string literals are automatically concatenated.
```
>>> 'Py' 'thon'
'Python'
```

This feature is especially handy for splitting long strings.
```
>>> text = ('Put several strings within parentheses '
        'to have them joined together.')
>>> text
'Put several strings within parentheses to have them joined together.'
```

Strings can be indexed (subscripted), with the first character having index 0. There is no separate character type; a character is simply a string of size one:

```
>>> word = 'Python'
>>> word[0]  # character in position 0
'P'
>>> word[5]  # character in position 5
'n'
```

Use negative numbers as indices to count from the end.
```
>>> word[-1]  # last character
'n'
>>> word[-2]  # second-last character
'o'
>>> word[-6]
'P'
```

While indexing fetches individual characters, slicing enables you to retrieve substrings:"

```
>>> word[0:2]  # characters from position 0 (included) to 2 (excluded)
'Py'
>>> word[2:5]  # characters from position 2 (included) to 5 (excluded)
'tho'
```

Slice indices have helpful defaults: if you don't specify the first index, it defaults to zero, and if you don't specify the second index, it defaults to the size of the string being sliced.
```
>>> word[:2]   # character from the beginning to position 2 (excluded)
'Py'
>>> word[4:]   # characters from position 4 (included) to the end
'on'
>>> word[-2:]  # characters from the second-last (included) to the end
'on'
```

A helpful way to understand slices is to visualize the indices as pointing between characters. The left edge of the first character is numbered 0, while the right edge of the last character in a string of n characters has index n. For instance:
```
 +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 | P | y | t | h | o | n |
 +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0   1   2   3   4   5   6
-6  -5  -4  -3  -2  -1
```

## 3.1.3 Lists

Lists in Python are versatile data structures enclosed in square brackets, capable of storing multiple items separated by commas. They can contain elements of different types, but typically consist of items of the same type. Lists offer flexibility for organizing and manipulating data, making them fundamental in Python programming for tasks like storage, iteration, and manipulation of collections of values.

```
>>> squares = [1, 4, 9, 16, 25]
>>> squares
[1, 4, 9, 16, 25]
```